[Markdown Basics](https://github.com/CU-ESIIL/Public-Observing-Unci-Maka/blob/main/docs/resources/markdown_basics.md)

# Project Team Biographies and Assignments
## Add your biographies here and your interests

- Shannon Boldt:
- - Responsibilities: all the things!
Biography of Shannon Boldt:
I am an elder member of the Lummi Nation in Washington State. The Point No Point Treaty Council has employed me since 1995 as the Data Manager/Information Systems Manager. Since 2021, I have attended the Northwest Indian College studying Native Environmental Science, I will be graduating June 2026. With a main goal use environmental science to address disparities facing tribal communities. It was here at Northwest Indian College, that I was selected to attend an internship at Colorado University. After the internship ended, some of the group decided to create a working group to continue our research into using data to inform tribal communities of the state of their lands soil, air and water. We are going to look at contaminants left behind from legacy mining, water air, soil and flora. In November of 2024 our work group submitted a grant proposal to (ESIIL) Environmental Data Science Innovation & Inclusion Lab, working under the National Science Foundation, to work with NASA, and the University of Colorado. I am one of the Project Investigators for this grant; I am learning Python programming to be able to use the data from NASA. My goal is to contribute to this research project by utilizing the data we gather, then share with the two tribal research locations, focusing on environmental justice.

-Cynthia Sanders
--Responsibilities: Participating in Understanding Changes in Indigenous Lands and Water Systems
As a science instructor (of thirteen years) from the College of the Muscogee Nation (CMN), a tribal college located in Oklahoma, I am utilizing the training that I have received from the Hyr-Sense training workshop in June 2024 to incorporate it into the classroom setting. The training session at ESILL was the first time that I had been involved in coding related to environmental data. Students participate actively in semester long research involving ecosystem changes and recognize how hyperspectral data is another method of determining continuous environmental change. After the 2024 conclusion our group decided to take the training one step further by applying it to the application of land-based knowledge, cultural reverence, and Indigenous community environmental concerns. Our group has been focused on the historic usage of Indigenous land and nearby waterways which can be defined as classification of being brownfields, recognized environmental concerns (rec), and superfunds. Such areas have indicated riparian regions which display variation levels of ecostress which may be linked to the past land and water management. In 2025 the group journeyed to the Ogalla Lakota Nation to identify these changes and how cottonwood tree could be used as measure for ecostress. 2026 will bring the group to the Hopi Nation to conduct similar data gathering and determine how ecosystem changes in growth patterns may be affecting the local community. When working with the group, I will engage in data collection as a participate and continue to learn and practice usage of ecostress determinants. While I will be mindful of data soverginity for each of Indigenous Nations that I visit, the hope is that the training acquired (application process) will allow myself and my CMN students to proceed in studies related to ecostress research in the territory of the Mvskoke Reservation of Oklahoma and the ancestral homelands of the Mvskoke in Georgia and Alabama. Along with my workshop session at ESILL, my previous education has included two bachelor’s degrees and two pending master’s degrees. Mvto (Thank you) for this opportunity to bring the techniques to my own Indigenous Nation.
